---
layout: post
title: Systematic temporal turnover across plant communities
subtitle: sDiv, GLORIA, forestREplot and GRACE collaborative project
cover-img: []
thumbnail-img:  /assets/img/fig1_range-001.png
tags: [paper]
---


The direction and magnitude of long-term changes in local plant species richness are highly variable among studies, while species turnover is ubiquitous. 
However, it is unknown whether the nature of species turnover is idiosyncratic or whether certain types of species are consistently gained or lost across different habitats. 
To address this question, we analyzed the trajectories of 1,827 vascular plant species over time intervals of up to 78 years at 141 sites in three habitats in Europe – 
mountain summits, forests, and lowland grasslands. Consistent across all habitats, we found that plant species with small geographic ranges tended to be replaced by species 
with large ranges, despite habitat-specific trends in species richness. Our results point to a predictable component of species turnover, likely explained by aspects of 
species’ niches correlated with geographic range size. Species with larger ranges tend to be associated with nutrient-rich sites and we found community composition shifts
towards more nutrient-demanding species in all three habitats. Global changes involving increased resource availability are thus likely to favor large-ranged, nutrient-demanding
species, which are typically strong competitors. Declines of small-ranged species could reflect not only abiotic drivers of global change, but also biotic pressure from increased
competition. Our study highlights a critical need to better understand the extent to which abiotic or biotic pressures drive systematic species turnover over time. 
